Document behavior for negative and missing savings values in cost calculations (#1741)
microsoft/finops-toolkit: docs-mslearn/toolkit/hubs/savings-calculations.md

Reviewer: Add a line in the changelog about adding new documentation about how savings are calculated under FinOps hubs v0.12.

Reviewer: Add a note in copilot-instructions.md that states that every PR must have a changelog update to ensure Copilot adds changelog updates for every PR.

**Example**: If list price data is missing but you paid $80 effective cost, savings show as $0 because we cannot determine if you saved money or overpaid.

<br>

## Savings calculation examples

The following table shows how different price scenarios are handled:

| List Price | Effective Price | Savings Displayed | Explanation |
|-----------:|----------------:|------------------:|-------------|
| 100        | 100             | 0                 | No discount applied |
| 100        | 80              | 20                | Standard savings of $20 |
| 100        | 120             | -20               | Negative savings - overpaid by $20 |
| *Missing*  | 80              | 0                 | Cannot calculate savings without list price |
| 100        | *Missing*       | 0                 | Cannot calculate savings without effective price |

<br>

## Impact on totals and aggregations

When negative savings are included in aggregated totals:
- Totals reflect the actual sum of all items (including negative values).
- Overall savings may be lower than expected due to negative contributions.
- This provides an accurate view of your total cost optimization impact.

> When prices are missing and zero savings are shown:
> - Totals will be lower than the complete savings picture.
> - This is expected behavior and indicates incomplete price data.
> - Consider exporting price sheets to get complete savings calculations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When prices are missing and zero savings are shown:

- Totals will be lower than the complete savings picture.
- This is expected behavior and indicates incomplete price data.
- Consider exporting the price sheet and re-ingesting costs for more complete savings calculations.
```

---

<!-- cSpell:ignore nextstepaction -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line MD025 -->
# Understanding savings calculations in FinOps toolkit

FinOps toolkit reports calculate savings by comparing different cost values to help you understand your optimization opportunities and actual savings achieved. This article explains how savings values are calculated and displayed, particularly for scenarios involving negative savings or missing price data.

Understanding these calculations is essential for correctly interpreting cost optimization reports and building trust in the data presented.

<br>

## How savings are calculated

Savings calculations in FinOps toolkit reports compare different cost values:

- **Negotiated discount savings** = List cost - Contracted cost
- **Commitment discount savings** = Contracted cost - Effective cost  
- **Total savings** = List cost - Effective cost

These calculations depend on having accurate price data for:
- **List prices** (public retail rates)
- **Contracted prices** (after negotiated discounts)
- **Effective prices** (after all discounts including commitments)

<br>

## Negative savings behavior

> ### When negative savings occur
> 
> **Negative savings are displayed when the effective price paid is higher than the list price or contracted (negotiated) price.** This indicates the resource cost more than standard pricing, which can happen due to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Negative savings are displayed when the effective price paid is higher than the list price or contracted (negotiated) price.** This indicates the resource cost more than standard pricing, which can happen due to:
```

- Pricing misconfigurations
- Unusual billing conditions
- Data quality issues in Cost Management
- Commitment discounts that provide less savings than negotiated discounts

> ### Why show negative savings
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Negative savings are displayed as negative numbers (for example, -$100) because they reflect the reality of your cost data. Hiding or zeroing these values would:

- Mask real cost concerns that need investigation
- Prevent identification of pricing anomalies
- Reduce transparency in cost reporting

**Example**: If you have a list price of $100 but paid $120 effective cost, the savings would show as -$20, indicating you overpaid by $20.

<br>

## Zero savings behavior

> ### When zero savings occur
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

**Zero savings are displayed when no reliable price comparison can be made.** This happens when:

- List prices are missing or null
- Contracted prices are missing or null  
- Reference prices are zero or invalid

> ### Why show zero savings for missing prices
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

When price data is missing, there's no reliable basis for calculating savings.

**Example**: If list price data is missing but you paid $80 effective cost, savings show as $0 because we cannot determine if you saved money or overpaid.

<br>

## Savings calculation examples

The following table shows how different price scenarios are handled:

| List Price | Effective Price | Savings Displayed | Explanation |
|-----------:|----------------:|------------------:|-------------|
| 100        | 100             | 0                 | No discount applied |
| 100        | 80              | 20                | Standard savings of $20 |
| 100        | 120             | -20               | Negative savings - overpaid by $20 |
| *Missing*  | 80              | 0                 | Cannot calculate savings without list price |
| 100        | *Missing*       | 0                 | Cannot calculate savings without effective price |

<br>

## Impact on totals and aggregations

> ### Including negative savings in totals
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

When negative savings are included in aggregated totals:
- Totals reflect the actual sum of all items (including negative values)
- Overall savings may be lower than expected due to negative contributions
- This provides an accurate view of your total cost optimization impact

> ### Including zero savings in totals
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

When prices are missing and zero savings are shown:

> - Totals will be lower than the complete savings picture

Reviewer: Add periods for all bullets

- This is expected behavior and indicates incomplete price data
- Consider exporting price sheets to get complete savings calculations

<br>

## Interpreting your results

> ### For negative savings
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

If you see negative savings in your reports:

1. **Investigate the cause** - Check for pricing misconfigurations or billing issues
2. **Review commitment utilization** - Ensure you're not paying for unused commitments
3. **Validate data quality** - Confirm Cost Management data is accurate
4. **Consider optimization** - Evaluate if commitment discounts are providing value

> 
> #### Diagnostic query for negative savings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    EffectiveOverContracted != 0 and abs(EffectiveOverContracted) < 0.00000001, 'Rounding error',
    ContractedOverList != 0 and abs(ContractedOverList) < 0.00000001, 'Rounding error',
    EffectiveOverList != 0 and abs(EffectiveOverList) < 0.00000001, 'Rounding error',
    ContractedCost < EffectiveCost or ListCost < ContractedCost or ListCost < EffectiveCost, '',
    EffectiveCost <= ContractedCost and ContractedCost <= ListCost, 'Good',
    '')
| project-reorder ListCost, ContractedCost, BilledCost, EffectiveCost, EffectiveOverList, EffectiveOverContracted, ContractedOverList, x_SourceChanges, ListUnitPrice, ContractedUnitPrice, x_BilledUnitPrice, x_EffectiveUnitPrice, CommitmentDiscountStatus, PricingQuantity, PricingUnit, x_PricingBlockSize, x_PricingUnitDescription
| summarize count(), EffectiveOverContracted = sum(EffectiveOverContracted), ContractedOverList = sum(ContractedOverList), EffectiveOverList = sum(EffectiveOverList), Type = arraystring(make_set(x_BillingAccountAgreement)) by scenario
```

This query categorizes different scenarios that can cause negative savings and helps identify the root cause of pricing discrepancies.

> ### For zero savings
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

If you see many zero savings values:

1. **Export price data** - Use Cost Management price sheet exports to populate missing prices
2. **Enable price population** - In storage reports, enable "Experimental: Populate Missing Prices" parameter
3. **Use FinOps hubs** - FinOps hubs with Data Explorer automatically populate missing prices when available

<br>

> ## Troubleshooting
> 
> For troubleshooting these issues, see [Troubleshoot common FinOps toolkit errors](../help/errors.md).
> 
> <br>
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Give feedback

Let us know how we're doing with a quick review. We use these reviews to improve and expand FinOps tools and resources.

> [!div class="nextstepaction"]

> > [Give feedback](https://portal.azure.com/#view/HubsExtension/InProductFeedbackBlade/extensionName/FinOpsToolkit/cesQuestion/How%20easy%20or%20hard%20is%20it%20to%20understand%20savings%20calculations%20in%20FinOps%20toolkit%20reports%3F/cvaQuestion/How%20valuable%20is%20the%20savings%20calculations%20documentation%3F/surveyId/FTK0.12/bladeName/Hubs/featureName/SavingsCalculations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [Give feedback](https://portal.azure.com/#view/HubsExtension/InProductFeedbackBlade/extensionName/FinOpsToolkit/cesQuestion/How%20easy%20or%20hard%20is%20it%20to%20understand%20savings%20calculations%20in%20FinOps%20toolkit%20reports%3F/cvaQuestion/How%20valuable%20is%20the%20savings%20calculations%20documentation%3F/surveyId/FTK/bladeName/Hubs/featureName/SavingsCalculations)
```

---

<!-- cSpell:ignore nextstepaction -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable-next-line MD025 -->
# Understanding savings calculations in FinOps toolkit

FinOps toolkit reports calculate savings by comparing different cost values to help you understand your optimization opportunities and actual savings achieved. This article explains how savings values are calculated and displayed, particularly for scenarios involving negative savings or missing price data.

Understanding these calculations is essential for correctly interpreting cost optimization reports and building trust in the data presented.

<br>

## How savings are calculated

Savings calculations in FinOps toolkit reports compare different cost values:

- **Negotiated discount savings** = List cost - Contracted cost
- **Commitment discount savings** = Contracted cost - Effective cost  
- **Total savings** = List cost - Effective cost

These calculations depend on having accurate price data for:
- **List prices** (public retail rates)
- **Contracted prices** (after negotiated discounts)
- **Effective prices** (after all discounts including commitments)

<br>

## Negative savings behavior

### When negative savings occur

> **Negative savings are displayed when the effective price paid is higher than the list price or negotiated price.** This indicates the resource cost more than standard pricing, which can happen due to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Negative savings are displayed when the effective price paid is higher than the list price or contracted (negotiated) price.** This indicates the resource cost more than standard pricing, which can happen due to:
```

- Pricing misconfigurations
- Unusual billing conditions
- Data quality issues in Cost Management

> - Commitment discounts that provide less savings than negotiated rates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Commitment discounts that provide less savings than negotiated discounts
```

Negative savings are displayed as negative numbers (for example, -$100) because they reflect the reality of your cost data. Hiding or zeroing these values would:

- Mask real cost concerns that need investigation
- Prevent identification of pricing anomalies
- Reduce transparency in cost reporting

**Example**: If you have a list price of $100 but paid $120 effective cost, the savings would show as -$20, indicating you overpaid by $20.

<br>

## Zero savings behavior

### When zero savings occur

**Zero savings are displayed when no reliable price comparison can be made.** This happens when:

- List prices are missing or null
- Contracted prices are missing or null  
- Reference prices are zero or invalid

### Why show zero savings for missing prices

When price data is missing, there's no reliable basis for calculating savings.

**Example**: If list price data is missing but you paid $80 effective cost, savings show as $0 because we cannot determine if you saved money or overpaid.

<br>

## Savings calculation examples

The following table shows how different price scenarios are handled:

| List Price | Effective Price | Savings Displayed | Explanation |

> |------------|-----------------|-------------------|-------------|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|-----------:|----------------:|------------------:|-------------|
```

| 100        | 100             | 0                 | No discount applied |
| 100        | 80              | 20                | Standard savings of $20 |
| 100        | 120             | -20               | Negative savings - overpaid by $20 |
| *Missing*  | 80              | 0                 | Cannot calculate savings without list price |
| 100        | *Missing*       | 0                 | Cannot calculate savings without effective price |

<br>

## Impact on totals and aggregations

### Including negative savings in totals

When negative savings are included in aggregated totals:
- Totals reflect the actual sum of all items (including negative values)
- Overall savings may be lower than expected due to negative contributions
- This provides an accurate view of your total cost optimization impact

### Including zero savings in totals

When prices are missing and zero savings are shown:

> - Totals will be lower than the complete savings picture

Reviewer: Add periods for all bullets

- This is expected behavior and indicates incomplete price data
- Consider exporting price sheets to get complete savings calculations

<br>

## Interpreting your results

### For negative savings

If you see negative savings in your reports:

1. **Investigate the cause** - Check for pricing misconfigurations or billing issues
2. **Review commitment utilization** - Ensure you're not paying for unused commitments
3. **Validate data quality** - Confirm Cost Management data is accurate
4. **Consider optimization** - Evaluate if commitment discounts are providing value

> #### Diagnostic query for negative savings

Reviewer: I'm on the fence, but since people likely won't find it in the troubleshooting guide, this is probably a good start.

    EffectiveCost <= ContractedCost and ContractedCost <= ListCost, 'Good',
    '')
| project-reorder ListCost, ContractedCost, BilledCost, EffectiveCost, EffectiveOverList, EffectiveOverContracted, ContractedOverList, x_SourceChanges, ListUnitPrice, ContractedUnitPrice, x_BilledUnitPrice, x_EffectiveUnitPrice, CommitmentDiscountStatus, PricingQuantity, PricingUnit, x_PricingBlockSize, x_PricingUnitDescription
| summarize count(), EffectiveOverContracted = sum(EffectiveOverContracted), ContractedOverList = sum(ContractedOverList), EffectiveOverList = sum(EffectiveOverList), Type = arraystring(make_set(x_BillingAccountAgreement)) by scenario
```

This query categorizes different scenarios that can cause negative savings and helps identify the root cause of pricing discrepancies.

### For zero savings

If you see many zero savings values:

1. **Export price data** - Use Cost Management price sheet exports to populate missing prices
2. **Enable price population** - In storage reports, enable "Experimental: Populate Missing Prices" parameter
3. **Use FinOps hubs** - FinOps hubs with Data Explorer automatically populate missing prices when available

<br>

> 
> 
> 
> ## Troubleshooting

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Troubleshooting
```

For troubleshooting these issues, see [Troubleshoot common FinOps toolkit errors](../help/errors.md).

<br>

## Give feedback

Let us know how we're doing with a quick review. We use these reviews to improve and expand FinOps tools and resources.

> [!div class="nextstepaction"]

> > [Give feedback](https://portal.azure.com/#view/HubsExtension/InProductFeedbackBlade/extensionName/FinOpsToolkit/cesQuestion/How%20easy%20or%20hard%20is%20it%20to%20understand%20savings%20calculations%20in%20FinOps%20toolkit%20reports%3F/cvaQuestion/How%20valuable%20is%20the%20savings%20calculations%20documentation%3F/surveyId/FTK0.11/bladeName/Toolkit/featureName/Help.SavingsCalculations)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [Give feedback](https://portal.azure.com/#view/HubsExtension/InProductFeedbackBlade/extensionName/FinOpsToolkit/cesQuestion/How%20easy%20or%20hard%20is%20it%20to%20understand%20savings%20calculations%20in%20FinOps%20toolkit%20reports%3F/cvaQuestion/How%20valuable%20is%20the%20savings%20calculations%20documentation%3F/surveyId/FTK0.12/bladeName/Hubs/featureName/SavingsCalculations)
```

<br>

## Related content

> Related resources:
> 
> - [Troubleshoot common FinOps toolkit errors](../help/errors.md)
> - [Data dictionary](../help/data-dictionary.md)
> - [Common terms](../help/terms.md)
> 
> Related reports:
> 
> - [Rate optimization report](../power-bi/rate-optimization.md)
> - [Cost summary report](../power-bi/cost-summary.md)
> 
> Related solutions:
> 
> - [FinOps hubs](./finops-hubs-overview.md)
> - [Cost Management exports](/azure/cost-management-billing/costs/tutorial-export-acm-data)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Troubleshoot common FinOps toolkit errors](../help/errors.md)
- [Data dictionary](../help/data-dictionary.md)
- [Common terms](../help/terms.md)
- [FinOps toolkit Power BI reports](../power-bi/reports.md)
```
